On the Criteria To Be Used in Decomposing Systems into Modules

---
Page 1
---


[Image: page-001-img-01.png]
Programming R. Morris
Techniques Editor
On the Criteria To Be
Used in Decomposing
Systems into Modules
D.L. Parnas
Carnegie-Mellon University
This paper discusses modularization as a mechanism Introduction
for improving the flexibility and comprehensibility of a
system while allowing the shortening of its development A lucid statement of the philosophy of modular
time. The effectiveness of a "modularization" is programming can be found in a 1970 textbook on the
dependent upon the criteria used in dividing the system design of system programs by Gouthier and Pont 1,
into modules. A system design problem is presented and ¶I0.23, which we quote below: 1
both a conventional and unconventional decomposition
A well-defined segmentation of the project effort ensures
are described. It is shown that the unconventional system modularity. Each task forms a separate, distinct program
decompositions have distinct advantages for the goals module. At implementation time each module and its inputs and
outputs are well-defined, there is no confusion in the intended
outlined. The criteria used in arriving at the decom-
interface with other system modules. At checkout time the in-
positions are discussed. The unconventional decomposi- tegrity of the module is tested independently; there are few sche-
tion, if implemented with the conventional assumption duling problems in synchronizing the completion of several tasks
before checkout can begin. Finally, the system is maintained in
that a module consists of one or more subroutines, will
modular fashion; system errors and deficiencies can be traced to
be less efficient in most cases. An alternative approach specific system modules, thus limiting the scope of detailed error
to implementation which does not have this effect is searching.
sketched.
Usually nothing is said about the criteria to be used
Key Words and Phrases: software, modules,
in dividing the system into modules. This paper will
modularity, software engineering, KWIC index,
discuss that issue and, by means of examples, suggest
software design
some criteria which can be used in decomposing a
CR Categories: 4.0
system into modules.
A Brief Status Report
The major advancement in the area of modular
programming has been the development of coding
techniques and assemblers which (l) allow one module
to be written with little knowledge of the code in
another module, and (2) allow modules to be reas-
Copyright @ 1972, Association for Computing Machinery, Inc. sembled and replaced without reassembly of the whole
General permission to republish, but not for profit, all or part
system. This facility is extremely valuable for the
of this material is granted, provided that reference is made to this
publication, to its date of issue, and to the fact that reprinting production of large pieces of code, but the systems most
privileges were granted by permission of the Association for Com-
often used as examples of problem systems are highly-
puting Machinery.
Author's address: Department of Computer Science, Carnegie- modularized programs and make use of the techniques
Mellon University, Pittsburgh, PA 15213. mentioned above.
1 Reprinted by permission of Prentice-Hall, Englewood
Cliffs, N.J.
1053 Communications December 1972
of Volume 15
the ACM Number 12

---
Page 2
---


[Image: page-002-img-01.png]
Expected Benefits of Modular Programming Modularlzation 1
We see the following modules:
The benefits expected of modular programming are: Module 1: Input. This module reads the data lines
(1) managerial--development time should be shortened from the input medium and stores them in core for
because separate groups would work on each module processing by the remaining modules. The characters
with little need for communication: (2) product flexi- are packed four to a word, and an otherwise unused
bility-it should be possible to make drastic changes to character is used to indicate the end of a word. An index
one module without a need to change others; (3) com- is kept to show the starting address of each line.
prehensibility-it should be possible to study the Module 2: Circular Shift. This module is called after
system one module at a time. The whole system can the input module has completed its work. It prepares an
therefore be better designed because it is better under- index which gives the address of the first character of
stood. each circular shift, and the original index of the line in
the array made up by module 1. It leaves its output in
core with words in pairs (original line number, starting
What Is Modularization? address).
Module 3: Alphabetizing. This module takes as
Below are several partial system descriptions called input the arrays produced by modules 1 and 2. It
modularizations. In this context "module" is considered produces an array in the same format as that produced
to be a responsibility assignment rather than a sub- by module 2. In this case, however, the circular shifts
program. The modularizations include the design deci- are listed in another order (alphabetically).
sions which must be made before the work on inde- Module 4: Output. Using the arrays produced by
pendent modules can begin. Quite different decisions module 3 and module 1, this module produces a nicely
are included for each alternative, but in all cases the formatted output listing all of the circular shifts. In a
intention is to describe all "system level" decisions (i.e. sophisticated system the actual start of each line will
decisions which affect more than one module). be marked, pointers to further information may be
inserted, and the start of the circular shift may actually
not be the first word in the line, etc.
Example System 1: A KWIC Index Production System Module 5: Master Control. This module does little
more than control the sequencing among the other four
The following description of a KWIC index will modules. It may also handle error messages, space
suffice for this paper. The KWIC index system accepts an allocation, etc.
ordered set of lines, each line is an ordered set of words, It should be clear that the above does not constitute
and each word is an ordered set of characters. Any line a definitive document. Much more information would
may be "circularly shifted" by repeatedly removing the have to be supplied before work could start. The defin-
first word and appending it at the end of the line. The ing documents would include a number of pictures
KWXC index system outputs a listing of all circular shifts showing core formats, pointer conventions, calling
of all lines in alphabetical order. conventions, etc. All of the interfaces between the four
This is a small system. Except under extreme cir- modules must be specified before work could begin.
cumstances (huge data base, no supporting software), This is a modularization in the sense meant by all
such a system could be produced by a good programmer proponents of modular programming. The system is
within a week or two. Consequently, none of the divided into a number of modules with well-defined
difficulties motivating modular programming are im- interfaces; each one is small enough and simple enough
portant for this system. Because it is impractical to to be thoroughly understood and well programmed.
treat a large system thoroughly, we must go through Experiments on a small scale indicate that this is
the exercise of treating this problem as if it were a large approximately the decomposition which would be
project. We give one modularization which typifies proposed by most programmers for the task specified.
current approaches, and another which has been used
successfully in undergraduate class projects. Modularization 2
We see the following modules:
Module 1: Line Storage. This module consists of a
number of functions or subroutines which provide the
means by which the user of the module may call on it.
The function call CHAR(r,w,c) will have as value an
integer representing the cth character in the rth line,
wth word. A call such as SETCHAR(r,w,c,d) will cause
the cth character in the wth word of the rth line to be
the character represented by d (i.e. CHAR(r,w,c) = d).
WORDS(r) returns as value the number of words in
1054 Communications December 1972
of Volume 15
the ACM Number 12

---
Page 3
---


[Image: page-003-img-01.png]
line r. There are certain restrictions in the way that these substantially different even if identical in the runnable
routines may be called; if these restrictions are violated representation. This is possible because the runnable
the routines "trap" to an error-handling subroutine representation need only be used for running; other
which is to be provided by the users of the routine. representations are used for changing, documenting,
Additional routines are available which reveal to the understanding, etc. The two systems will not be identical
caller the number of words in any line, the number of in those other representations.
lines currently stored, and the number of characters in Changeability. There are a number of design de-
any word. Functions DELINE and DELWRD are cisions which are questionable and likely to change
provided to delete portions of lines which have already under many circumstances. This is a partial list.
been stored. A precise specification of a similar module
1. Input format.
has been given in 3 and 8 and we will not repeat it
2. The decision to have all lines stored in core. For
here.
large jobs it may prove inconvenient or impractical to
Module 2: INPUT. This module reads the original
keep all of the lines in core at any one time.
lines from the input media and calls the line storage
3. The decision to pack the characters four to a word.
module to have them stored internally.
In cases where we are working with small amounts of
Module 3: Circular Shifter. The principal functions
data it may prove undesirable to pack the characters;
provided by this module are analogs of functions pro-
time will be saved by a character per word layout. In
vided in module I. The module creates the impres-
other cases we may pack, but in different formats.
sion that we have created a line holder containing
4. The decision to make an index for the circular'
not all of the lines but all of the circular shifts of the
shifts rather that actually store them as such. Again, for
lines. Thus the function call CSCHAR(I,w,c) provides
a small index or a large core, writing them out may be
the value representing the cth character in the wth
the preferable approach. Alternatively, we may choose
word of the lth circular shift. It is specified that (1)
to prepare nothing during CSSETUP. All computation
if i < j then the shifts of line i precede the shifts of line
could be done during the calls on the other functions
j, and (2) for each line the first shift is the original
such as CSCHAR.
line, the second shift is obtained by making a one-word
5. The decision to alphabetize the list once, rather
rotation to the first shift, etc. A function CSSETUP is
than either (a) search for each item when needed, or
provided which must be called before the other functions
(b) partially alphabetize as is done in Hoare's rIND
have their specified values. For a more precise specifica-
2. In a number of circumstances it would be advan-
tion of such a module see 8.
tageous to distribute the computation involved in
Module 4: Alphabetizer. This module consists
alphabetization over the time required to produce the
principally of two functions. One, ALPH, must be
index.
called before the other will have a defined value. The
second, ITH, will serve as an index. ITH(i) will give the By looking at these changes we can see the differences
index of the circular shift which comes ith in the between the two modularizations. The first change is
alphabetical ordering. Formal definitions of these confined to one module in both decompositions. For the
functions are given 8. first decomposition the second change would result in
Module 5: Output. This module will give the desired changes in every module! The same is true of the third
printing of set of lines or circular shifts. change. In the first decomposition the format of the
Module 6: Master Control. Similar in function to the line storage in core must be used by all of the programs.
modularization above. In the second decomposition the story is entirely
different. Knowledge of the exact way that the lines are
Comparison of the Two Modularizations stored is entirely hidden from all but module 1. Any
General. Both schemes will work. The first is quite change in the manner of storage can be confined to that
conventional; the second has been used successfully in module!
a class project 7. Both will reduce the programming to In some versions of this system there was an addi-
the relatively independent programming of a number of tional module in the decomposition. A symbol table
small, manageable, programs. module (as specified in 3) was used within the line
Note first that the two decompositions may share storage module. This fact was completely invisible to
all data representations and access methods. Our the rest of the system.
discussion is about two different ways of cutting up The fourth change is confined to the circular shift
what may be the same object. A system built according module in the second decomposition, but in the first
to decomposition 1 could conceivably be identical decomposition the alphabetizer and the output routines
after assembly to one built according to decomposition will also know of the change.
2. The differences between the two alternatives are in The fifth change will also prove difficult in the first
the way that they are divided into the work assignments, decomposition. The output module will expect the index
and the interfaces between modules. The algorithms to have been completed before it began. The alpha-
used in both cases might be identical. The systems are betizer module in the second decomposition was
1055 Communications December 1972
of Volume 15
the ACM Number 12

---
Page 4
---


[Image: page-004-img-01.png]
designed so that a user could not detect when the Improvement in Circular Shift Module
alphabetization was actually done. No other module To illustrate the impact of such a criterion let us
need be changed. take a closer look at the design of the circular shift
Independent Development. In the first modularization module from the second decomposition. Hindsight now
the interfaces between the modules are the fairly com- suggests that this definition reveals more information
plex formats and table organizations described above. than necessary. While we carefully hid the method
These represent design decisions which cannot be taken of storing or calculating the list of circular shifts, we
lightly. The table structure and organization are es- specified an order to that list. Programs could be effec-
sential to the efficiency of the various modules and must tively written if we specified only (I) that the lines
be designed carefully. The development of those formats indicated in circular shift's current definition will all
will be a major part of the module development and exist in the table, (2) that no one of them would be
that part must be a joint effort among the several included twice, and (3) that an additional function
development groups. In the second modularization the existed which would allow us to identify the original
interfaces are more abstract; they consist primarily in line given the shift. By prescribing the order for the
the function names and the numbers and types of the shifts we have given more information than necessary
parameters. These are relatively simple decisions and and so unnecessarily restricted the class of systems that
the independent development of modules should we can build without changing the definitions. For
begin much earlier. example, we have not allowed for a system in which the
Comprehensibility. To understand the output module circular shifts were produced in alphabetical order,
in the first modularization, it will be necessary to ALPH is empty, and ITH simply returns its argument
understand something of the alphabetizer, the circular as a value. Our failure to do this in constructing the
shifter, and the input module. There will be aspects of systems with the second decomposition must clearly be
the tables used by output which will only make sense classified as a design error.
because of the way that the other modules work. There In addition to the general criteria that each module
will be constraints on the structure of the tables due to hides some design decision from the rest of the system,
the algorithms used in the other modules. The system we can mention some specific examples of decom-
will only be comprehensible as a whole. It is my sub- positions which seem advisable.
jective judgment that this is not true in the second
1. A data structure, its internal linkings, accessing
modularization.
procedures and modifying procedures are part of a
single module. They are not shared by many modules as
The Criteria
is conventionally done. This notion is perhaps just an
Many readers will now see what criteria were used
elaboration of the assumptions behind the papers of
in each decomposition. In the first decomposition the
Balzer 9 and Mealy 10. Design with this in mind is
criterion used was to make each major step in the
clearly behind the design of BLISS 11.
processing a module. One might say that to get the first
2. The sequence of instructions necessary to call a given
decomposition one makes a flowchart. This is the most
routine and the routine itself are part of the same module.
common approach to decomposition or modulariza-
This rule was not relevant in the Fortran systems used
tion. It is an outgrowth of all programmer training
for experimentation but it becomes essential for systems
which teaches us that we should begin with a rough
constructed in an assembly language. There are no
flowchart and move from there to a detailed imple-
perfect general calling sequences for real machines and
mentation. The flowchart was a useful abstraction for
consequently they tend to vary as we continue our
systems with on the order of 5,000-10,000 instructions,
search for the ideal sequence. By assigning responsibility
but as we move beyond that it does not appear to be
for generating the call to the person responsible for the
sufficient; something additional is needed.
routine we make such improvements easier and also
The second decomposition was made using 'fin-
make it more feasible to have several distinct sequences
formation hiding" 4 as a criterion. The modules no
in the same software structure.
longer correspond to steps in the processing. The line
3. The formats of control blocks used in queues in
storage module, for example, is used in almost every
operating systems and similar programs must be hidden
action by the system. Alphabetization may or may not
within a "control block module." It is conventional to
correspond to a phase in the processing according to
make such formats the interfaces between various
the method used. Similarly, circular shift might, in some
modules. Because design evolution forces frequent
circumstances, not make any table at all but calculate
changes on control block formats such a decision often
each character as demanded. Every module in the
proves extremely costly.
second decomposition is characterized by its knowledge
4. Character codes, alphabetic orderings, and similar
of a design decision which it hides from all others. Its
data should be hidden in a module for greatest flexibility.
interface or definition was chosen to reveal as little as
5. The sequence in which certain items will be proc-
possible about its inner workings.
essed should (as far as practical) be hidden within a
single module. Various changes ranging from equip-
1056 Communications December 1972
of Volume 15
the ACM Number 12

---
Page 5
---


[Image: page-005-img-01.png]
ment additions to unavailability of certain resources in statement that the order in time in which processing is
an operating system make sequencing extremely vari- expected to take place should not be used in making
able. the decomposition into modules. It further provides
evidence that a careful job of decomposition can result
Efficiency and Implementation in considerable carryover of work from one project to
If we are not careful the second decomposition will another.
prove to be much less efficient than the first. If each of A more detailed discussion of this example was
the functions is actually implemented as a procedure contained in [8].
with an elaborate calling sequence there will be a great
deal of such calling due to the repeated switching
between modules. The first decomposition will not Hierarchical Structure
suffer from this problem because there is relatively in-
frequent transfer of control between modules. We can find a program hierarchy in the sense illus-
To save the procedure call overhead, yet gain the trated by Dijkstra [5] in the system defined according to
advantages that we have seen above, we must implement decomposition 2. If a symbol table exists, it functions
these modules in an unusual way. In many cases the without any of the other modules, hence it is on level 1.
routines will be best inserted into the code by an Line storage is on level 1 if no symbol table is used or it
assembler; in other cases, highly specialized and efficient is on level 2 otherwise. Input and Circular Shifter re-
transfers would be inserted. To successfully and quire line storage for their functioning. Output and
efficiently make use of the second type of decomposition Alphabetizer will require Circular Shifter, but since
will require a tool by means of which programs may be Circular Shifter and line holder are in some sense
written as if the functions were subroutines, but as- compatible, it would be easy to build a parameterized
sembled by whatever implementation is appropriate. If version of those routines which could be used to
such a technique is used, the separation between alphabetize or print out either the original lines or the
modules may not be clear in the final code. For that circular shifts. In the first usage they would not require
reason additional program modification features would Circular Shifter; in the second they would. In other
also be useful. In other words, the several representa- words, our design has allowed us to have a single
tions of the program (which were mentioned earlier) representation for programs which may run at either
must be maintained in the machine together with a of two levels in the hierarchy.
program performing mapping between them. In discussions of system structure it is easy to confuse
the benefits of a good decomposition with those of a
A Decomposition Common to a Compiler and Interpretor hierarchical structure. We have a hierarchical structure
for the Same Language if a certain relation may be defined between the modules
In an earlier attempt to apply these decomposition or programs and that relation is a partial ordering. The
rules to a design project we constructed a translator for relation we are concerned with is "uses" or "depends
a Markov algorithm expressed in the notation described upon." It is better to use a relation between programs
in [6]. Although it was not our intention to investigate since in many cases one module depends upon only
the relation between compiling and interpretive trans- part of another module (e.g. Circular Shifter depends
lators of a langugage, we discovered that our decom- only on the output parts of the line holder and not on
position was valid for a pure compiler and several the correct working of SETWORD). It is conceivable
varieties of interpretors for the language. Although there that we could obtain the benefits that we have been
would be deep and substantial differences in the final discussing without such a partial ordering, e.g. if all
running representations of each type of compiler, we the modules were on the same level. The partial ordering
found that the decisions implicit in the early decom- gives us two additional benefits. First, parts of the
position held for all. system are benefited (simplified) because they use the
This would not have been true if we had divided services of lower 2 levels. Second, we are able to cut off
responsibilities along the classical lines for either a the upper levels and still have a usable and useful
compiler or interpretor (e.g. syntax recognizer, code product. For example, the symbol table can be used in
generator, run time routines for a compiler). Instead other applications; the line holder could be the basis of
the decomposition was based upon the hiding of various a question answering system. The existence of the
decisions as in the example above. Thus register repre- hierarchical structure assures us that we can "prune"
sentation, search algorithm, rule interpretation etc. were off the upper levels of the tree and start a new tree on
modules and these problems existed in both compiling the old trunk. If we had designed a system in which the
and interpretive translators. Not only was the decom- "low level" modules made some use of the "high level"
position valid in all cases, but many of the routines modules, we would not have the hierarchy, wewouldfind
could be used with only slight changes in any sort of it much harder to remove portions of the system, and
translator. "level" would not have much meaning in the system.
This example provides additional support for the Here "lower" means "lower numbered."
1057 Communications December 1972
of Volume 15
the ACM Number 12

---
Page 6
---


[Image: page-006-img-01.png]
Since it is conceivable that we could have a system
with the type of decomposition shown in version 1
(important design decisions in the interfaces) but
retaining a hierarchical structure, we must conclude
that hierarchical structure and "clean" decomposition
are two desirable but independent properties of a
system structure.
Conclusion
We have tried to demonstrate by these examples that
it is almost always incorrect to begin the decomposition
of a system into modules on the basis of a flowchart.
We propose instead that one begins with a list of
difficult design decisions or design decisions which are
likely to change. Each module is then designed to hide
such a decision from the others. Since, in most cases,
design decisions transcend time of execution, modules
will not correspond to steps in the processing. To
achieve an efficient implementation we must abandon
the assumption that a module is one or more sub-
routines, and instead allow subroutines and programs
to be assembled collections of code from various
modules.
Received August 1971; revised November 1971
References
1. Gauthier, Richard, and Pont, Stephen. Designing Systems
Programs, (C), Prentice-Hall, Englewood Cliffs, N.J., 1970.
2. Hoare, C. A. R. Proof of a program, FIND. Comm. ACM 14,
1 (Jan. 1971), 39-45.
3. Parnas, D. L. A technique for software module specification
with examples. Comm. ACM 15, 5 (May, 1972), 330-336.
4. Parnas, D. L. Information distribution aspects of design
methodology. Tech. Rept., Depart. Computer Science, Carnegie-
Mellon U., Pittsburgh, Pa., 1971. Also presented at the IFIP
Congress 1971, Ljubljana, Yugoslavia.
5. Dijkstra, E. W. The structure of "THE"-multiprogramming
system. Comm. ACM 11, 5 (May 1968), 341-346.
6. Galler, B., and Perlis, A. J. A View of Programming Languages,
Addison-Wesley, Reading, Mass., 1970.
7. Parnas, D. L. A course on software engineering. Proc. SIGCSE
Technical Symposium, Mar. 1972.
8. Parnas, D. L. On the criteria to be used in decomposing
systems into modules. Tech. Rept., Depart. Computer Science,
Carnegie-Mellon U., Pittsburgh, Pa., 1971.
9. Balzer, R. M. Dataless programming. Proc. AFIPS 1967
FJCC, Vol. 31, AFIPS Press, Montvale, N.J., pp. 535-544.
10. Mealy, G. H. Another look at data. Proc. AFIPS 1967 FJCC,
Vol. 31, AFIPS Press, Montvale, N.J., pp. 525-534.
11. Wulf, W. A., Russell, D. B., and Habermann, A. N. BLISS,
A language for systems programming. Comm. ACM 14, 12 (Dec.
1971), 780-790.
1058 Communications December 1972
of Volume 15
the ACM Number 12

