---
Page 001
---
Peter Naur, Programming as Theory Building *° 227

PETER NAUR, PROGRAMMING AS THEORY BUILDING

Peter Naur, widely known as one of the
authors of the programming language
syntax notation “Backus-Naur Form”
(BNF), wrote “Programming as Theory
Building” in 1985. It was reprinted in his
collection of works, Computing: A Human
Activity (Naur 1992).

This article is, to my mind, the most
accurate account of what goes on in
designing and coding a program. I refer to
it regularly when discussing how much
documentation to. create, how to pass
along tacit knowledge, and the value of
the XP’s metaphor-setting exercise. It also
provides a way to examine a methodol-
ogy’s economic structure.

In the article, which follows, note that
the quality of the designing program-
mer’s work is related to the quality of the
match between his theory of the problem
and his theory of the solution. Note that
the quality of a later programmer’s work
is related to the match between his theo-
ries and the previous programmer’s theo-
ries.

Using Naur’s ideas, the designer’s job
is not to pass along “the design” but to
pass along “the theories” driving the
design. The latter goal is more useful and
more appropriate. It also highlights that
knowledge of the theory is tacit in the
owning, and so passing along the theory
requires passing along both explicit and
tacit knowledge.

Here is Peter Naur’s way of saying it.

“PROGRAMMING AS THEORY
BUILDING”

Introduction

The present discussion is a contribution
to the understanding of what program-
ming is. It suggests that programming
properly should be regarded as an activity
by which the programmers form or
achieve a certain kind of insight, a theory,
of the matters at hand. This suggestion is
in contrast to what appears to be a more
common notion, that programming should
be regarded as a production of a program
and certain other texts.

Some of the background of the views,
presented here is to be found in certain
observations of what actually happens to
programs and the teams of programmers
dealing with them, particularly in situa-
tions arising from unexpected and. per-
haps erroneous program executions or
reactions, and on the occasion of modifi-
cations of programs. The difficulty of
accommodating such observations in a
production view of programming sug-
gests that this view. is misleading. The
theory building view is presented as an
alternative.

A more general background of the pre-
sentation is a conviction that it is important
to have an appropriate understanding of
what programming is. If our understand-
ing is inappropriate we will misunderstand
the difficulties that arise in the activity and
our attempts to overcome them will give
rise to conflicts and frustrations. -

---
Page 002
---
228 + NAUR,EHN, MUSASHI

In the present discussion some of the
crucial background experience will first be
outlined. This is followed by an explana-
tion of a theory of what programming is,
denoted the Theory Building View. The
subsequent sections enter into some of the
consequences of the Theory Building View.

Programming and the Programmers’

Knowledge

I shall use the word programming to
denote the whole activity of design and
implementation of programmed solutions.
What I am concerned with is the activity of
matching some significant part and aspect
of an activity in the real world to the for-
mal symbol manipulation that can be done
by a program running on a computer. With
such a notion it follows directly that the
programming activity I am talking about
must include the development in time cor-
responding to the changes taking place in
the real world activity being matched by
the program execution, in other words
program modifications. .

One way of stating the main point I
want to make is that programming in this
sense primarily must be the program-
mers’ building up knowledge of a certain
kind, knowledge taken to be basically the
programmers’ immediate possession, any
documentation being an auxiliary, sec-
ondary product.

As a background of the further elabora-
tion of this view given in the following
sections, the remainder of the present sec-
tion will describe some real.experience of
dealing with large programs that has
seemed to me more and more significant
as I have pondered over the problems. In
either case the experience is my own or

has been communicated to me by persons

having firsthand contact with the activity
in question.

Case 1 concerns a compiler. It has been

developed by a group A for a Language L
and worked very well on computer X.
Now another group B has the task to write
a compiler for a language L + M, a modest
extension of L, for computer Y. Group B
decides that the compiler for L developed
by group A will be a good starting point
for their design, and get a contract with
group A that they will get support in the
form of full documentation, including
annotated program texts and much addi-
tional written design discussion, and also
personal advice. The arrangement was
effective and group B managed to develop
the compiler they wanted. In the present
context the significant issue is the impor-
tance of the personal advice from group A
in the matters that concerned how to
implement the extensions M to the lan-
guage. During the design phase group B
made suggestions for the manner in which
the extensions should be accommodated
and submitted them to group A for review.
In several major cases it turned out that the
solutions suggested by group B were
found by group A to make no use of the
facilities that were not only inherent in the
structure of the existing compiler but were
discussed at length in its documentation,
and to be based instead on additions to
that structure in the form of patches that
effectively destroyed its power and sim-
plicity. The members of group A were able
to spot these cases instantly and could pro-
pose simple and effective solutions,
framed entirely within the existing
structure. This is an example of how the

Ae eS

---
Page 003
---
buy DP eh ee Nh :

OOD OD ~My W)1 Ve Feu ne

mot

”

Ow

Peter Naur, Programming as Theory Building * 229

full program text and additional documen-
tation is insufficient in conveying to even
the highly motivated group B the deeper
insight into the design, that theory which
is immediately present to the members of
group A.

In the years following these events the
compiler developed by group B was taken
over by other programmers of the same
organization, without guidance from
group A. Information obtained by a mem-
ber of group A about the compiler result-
ing from the further modification of it
after about 10 years made it clear that at
that later stage the original powerful
structure was still visible, but made
entirely ineffective by amorphous addi-
tions of many different kinds. Thus, again,
the program text and its documentation
has proved insufficient as a carrier of
some of the most important design ideas.

Case 2 concerns the installation and
fault diagnosis of a large real-time system
for monitoring industrial production
activities. The system is marketed by its
producer, each delivery of the system
being adapted individually to its specific
environment of sensors and display
devices. The size of the program delivered
in each installation is of the order of
200,000 lines. The relevant experience
from the way this kind of system is han-
dled concerns the role and manner of
work of the group of installation and fault
finding programmers. The facts are, first
that these programmers have been closely
concerned with the system as a full time
occupation over a period of several years,
from the time the system was under
design. Second, when diagnosing a fault
these programmers rely almost exclu-

sively on their ready knowledge of the
system and the annotated program text,
and are unable to conceive of any kind of
additional documentation that would be
useful to them. Third, other program-
mers’ groups who are responsible for the
operation of particular installations of the
system, and thus receive documentation
of the system and full guidance on its use
from the producer’s staff, regularly
encounter difficulties that upon consulta-
tion with the producer’s installation and
fault. finding programmer are traced to
inadequate understanding of the existing
documentation, but which can be cleared
up easily by the installation and fault
finding programmers.

The conclusion seems inescapable that
at least with certain kinds of large pro-
grams, the continued adaptation, modifi-
cation, and correction of errors in them, is
essentially dependent on a certain kind of
knowledge possessed by a group of pro-
grammers who are closely and continu-
ously connected with them.

Ryle’s Notion of Theory

If it is granted that programming must
involve, as the essential part, a building up
of the programmers’ knowledge, the next
issue is to characterize that knowledge
more closely. What will be considered here
is the suggestion that the programmers’
knowledge properly should be regarded
as a theory, in the sense of Ryle [1949].
Very briefly, a person who has or possesses
a theory in this sense knows how to do cer-
tain things and in addition can support the
actual doing with explanations, justifica-
tions, and answers to queries, about the
activity of concern. It may be noted that

---
Page 004
---
230 * NAUR, EHN, MUSASHI

Ryle’s notion of theory appears as an
example of what K. Popper [Popper, and
Eccles, 1977] calls unembodied World 3
objects and thus has a defensible philo-
sophical standing. In the present section
we shall describe Ryle’s notion of theory in
more detail.

Ryle [1949] develops his notion of the-
ory as part of his analysis of the nature of
intellectual activity, particularly the man-
ner in which intellectual activity differs
from, and goes beyond, activity that is
merely intelligent. In intelligent behaviour
the person displays, not any particular
knowledge of facts, but the ability.to do
certain things, such as to make and appre-
ciate jokes, to talk grammatically, or to
fish. More particularly, the intelligent per-
formance is characterized in part by the
person’s doing them well, according to
certain criteria, but further displays the
person's ability to apply the criteria so as
to detect and correct lapses, -to learn from
the examples of others, and so forth. It
may be noted that this notion of intelli-
gence does not rely on any notion that the
intelligent behaviour depends on the per-
son’s following or adhering to rules, pre-
scriptions, or methods. On the contrary,
the very act of adhering to rules can be
done more or less intelligently; if the exer-
cise of intelligence depended on following
rules there would have to be rules about
how to follow rules, and about how to fol-
low the rules about following rules, etc., in
an infinite regress, which is absurd.

What characterizes intellectual activity,
over and beyond activity that is merely
intelligent, is the person’s building and
having a theory, where theory is

understood as the knowledge a person
must have in order not only to do certain
things intelligently but also to explain
them, to answer queries about them, to
argue about them, and so forth. A person
who has a theory is prepared to enter into
such activities; while building the theory
the person is trying to get it.

The notion of theory in the sense used
here applies not only to the elaborate con-
structions of specialized fields of enquiry,
but equally to activities that any person
who has received education will partici-
pate in on certain occasions. Even quite
unambitious activities of everyday life
may give rise to people's theorizing, for
example in planning how to place furni-
ture or how to get to some place by means
of certain means of transportation.

The notion of theory employed here is
explicitly not confined to what may be
called the most general or abstract part of
the insight. For example, to have Newton’s
theory of mechanics as understood here it
is not enough to understand the central
laws, such as that force ‘equals mass times
acceleration. In: addition, as described in
more detail by Kuhn [1970, p. 187ff], the
person having the theory must have an
understanding of the manner in which the
central laws apply to certain aspects of
reality, so as to -be able to recognize and
apply the theory to other similar aspects. A
person having Newton’s theory of
mechanics must thus understand how it
applies to the motions of pendulums and
the planets, and must be able to recognize
similar phenomena in the world, so as to
be able to employ the mathematically
expressed rules of the theory properly.

Oot Oo ew mee Mm

BOs kK -

ra
T
&
&
e

---
Page 005
---
Peter Naur, Programming as Theory Building * 231

The dependence of a theory on a grasp
of certain kinds of similarity between situ-
ations and events of the real world gives
the reason why the knowledge held by
someone who has the theory could not, in
principle, be expressed in terms of rules.
In fact, the similarities in question are not,
and cannot be, expressed in terms of crite-
ria, no more than the similarities of many
other kinds of objects, such as human
faces, tunes, or tastes of wine, can be thus
expressed.

The Theory To Be Built by the

Programmer

In terms of Ryle’s notion of theory,
what has to be built by the programmer is
a theory of how certain affairs of the

. world will be handled by, or supported
by, a computer program. On the Theory
Building View of programming the theory
built by the programmers has primacy
over such other products as program
texts, user documentation, and additional
documentation such as specifications.

In arguing for the Theory Building
View, the basic issue is to show how the
knowledge’ possessed by the program-
mer by virtue of his or her having the the-
ory necessarily, and in an _ essential
manner, transcends that which is
recorded in the documented products.
The answers to this issue is that the pro-
grammer’s knowledge transcends that
given in documentation in at least three
essential areas:

1) The programmer having the theory
of the program can explain how the solu-
tion relates to the affairs of the world that
it helps to handle. Such an explanation
will have to be concerned with the manner

in which the affairs of the world, both in
their overall characteristics and_ their
details, are, in some sense, mapped into
the program text and into any additional
documentation. Thus the programmer
must be able to explain, for each part of
the program text and for each of its overall
structural characteristics, what aspect or
activity of the world is matched by it. Con-
versely, for any aspect or activity of the
world the programmer is able to state its
manner of mapping into the program text.
By far the largest part of the world aspects
and activities will of course lie outside the
scope of the program text, being irrelevant
in the context. However, the decision that
a part of the world is relevant can only be
made by someone who understands the
whole world. This understanding must be
contributed by the programmer.

2) The programmer having the theory
of the program can explain why each part
of the program. is what it is, in other
words is able to support the actual pro-
gram text with a justification of some sort.
The final basis of the justification is and
must always remain the programmer’s
direct, intuitive knowledge or estimate.
This holds even where the justification
makes use of reasoning, perhaps with
application of design rules, quantitative
estimates, comparisons with alternatives,
and such like, the point being that the
choice of the principles and rules, and the
decision that they are relevant to the situ-
ation at hand, again must in the final anal-
ysis remain a matter of the programmer’s
direct knowledge.

3) The programmer having the theory of
the program is able to respond construc-
tively to any demand for a modification of
---
Page 006
---
232, * NAUR,EHN, MUSASHI

the program so as to support the affairs of
the world in a new manner. Designing
how a modification is best incorporated
into an established program depends on
the perception of the similarity of the new
demand with the operational facilities
already built into the program. The kind of
similarity that has tobe perceived is one
between aspects of the world. It only
makes sense to the agent who has knowl-
edge of the world, that is to the program-
mer, and cannot be reduced to any limited
set of criteria or rules, for reasons similar to
the ones given above why the justification
of the program cannot be thus reduced.

While the discussion of the present sec-
tion presenis some basic arguments for
adopting the Theory Building View of
programming, an assessment of the view
should take into account to what extent it
may contribute to a coherent understand-
ing of programming and its. problems.
Such matters will be discussed in the fol-
lowing sections.

Problems and Costs of Program

Modifications

A prominent reason for proposing the
Theory Building View of programming is
the desire to establish an insight into pro-
gramming. suitable for supporting a
sound understanding of program modifi-
cations. This question will therefore be the
first one to be taken up for analysis.

One thing seems to be agreed by. every-
one, that software will be modified. It is
invariably the case that a program, once in
operation, will be felt to be only part of the
answer to the problems at hand. Also the
very use of the program itself will inspire
ideas for further useful services that the

program ought to provide. Hence the
need for ways to handle modifications.

The question of program modifications
is closely tied to that of programming
costs. In the face of a need for a changed
manner of operation of the program, one
hopes to achieve a saving of costs by mak-
ing modifications of an existing program
text, rather than by writing an entirely
new program.

The expectation that program modifi-
cations at low cost ought to be possible is
one that calls for closer analysis. First it
should be noted that such an expectation
cannot be supported by analogy with
modifications of other complicated man-
made constructions. Where modifications
are occasionally put into action, for exam-
ple in the case of buildings, they are well
known to be expensive and in fact com-
plete demolition of the existing building
followed by new construction is often
found to be preferable economically. Sec-
ond, the expectation of the possibility of
low cost program modifications conceiv-
ably finds support in the fact that a pro-
gram is a text held in a medium allowing
for easy editing. For this support to be
valid it must clearly be assumed that the
dominating cost is one of text manipula-
tion. This would agree with a notion of
programming as text production. On the
Theory Building View this whole. argu-
ment is false. This view gives no support
to an expectation that program modifica-
tions at low cost are generally possible.

A further closely related issue is that of
program flexibility. In including flexibility
in a program we build into the program
certain operational facilities that are not
immediately demanded, but which are

---
Page 007
---
the

ions
ing
ged
one
aak-
ram
rely

difi-
le is
‘st it
ition
with
nan-
ions
cam-
well
‘om-
ding
often
Sec-

zeiv-
pro-
wing
0 be
t the
oula-

m of
1 the
gu
yport
ifica-

iat of
sility
zram
2 not
\ are

Peter Naur, Programming as Theory Building + 233

likely to turn out to be useful. Thus a flex-
ible program is able to handle certain
classes of changes of external circum-
stances without being modified.

It is often stated that programs should
be designed to include a lot of flexibility,
so as to be readily adaptable to changing
circumstances. Such advice may. be rea-
sonable as far as flexibility that can be eas-
ily achieved is concerned. However,
flexibility can in general only be achieved
at a substantial cost. Each item of it has to
be designed, including what circum-
stances it has. to cover.and by what kind
of parameters it should be controlled.
Then it has to be implemented, tested,
and described. This cost is incurred. in
achieving a program feature whose use-
fulness depends entirely on future events.
It must be obvious that built-in program
flexibility is no answer to the general
demand for adapting programs to the
changing circumstances of the world.

In a program modification an existing
programmed solution has to be changed so
as to cater for a change in the real world
activity it has to match. What is needed in
a modification, first of all, is.a confronta-
fion of the existing solution with the
demands called for by the desired modifi-
cation. In this confrontation the degree and
kind of similarity between the capabilities
of the existing solution and the new
demands has to be determined. This need
for a determination of similarity brings out
the merit of the Theory Building View.
Indeed, precisely in a determination of
similarity the shortcoming of any view of
programming that ignores the central
requirement for the direct participation of
persons who possess the appropriate

insight becomes evident. The point is that
the kind of similarity that has to be recog-
nized is accessible to the human beings
who possess the theory of the program,
although entirely outside the reach of what
can be determined by rules, since even the
criteria on which to judge it cannot be for-
mulated. From the insight into the similar-
ity between the new requirements and
those already satisfied by the program, the
programmer is able to design the change of
the program text needed to implement the
modification.

In a certain sense there can be no ques-
tion of a theory modification, only of a pro-
gram modification. Indeed, a person
having the theory must already be pre-
pared to respond to the kinds of questions
and demands that may give rise to pro-
gram modifications. This observation leads
to the important conclusion that the prob-
lems of program modification arise from
acting on the assumption that program-
ming consists of program text production,
instead of recognizing programming as an
activity of theory building.

On the basis of the Theory Building
View the decay of a program text as a
result of modifications made by program-
mers without a proper grasp of the under-
lying .theory becomes understandable.
Asa matter of fact, if viewed merely as a
change of the program text and of the
external behaviour of the execution, a
given desired modification may usually
be realized in many different ways, all
correct. At the same time, if viewed in
relation to the theory of the program these
ways may look very. different, some of
them perhaps conforming to that theory
or extending it in a natural way, while

---
Page 008
---
234. «© ~NAUR, EHN, MUSASHI

others may be wholly inconsistent with
that theory, perhaps having the character
of unintegrated patches on the main part
of the program. This difference of charac-
ter of various changes is one that can only
make sense to the programmer who pos-
sesses the theory of the program. At the
same time the character of changes made
in a program text is vital to the longer
term viability of the program. For a pro-
gram: to retain its quality it is mandatory
that each modification is firmly grounded
in the theory of it. Indeed, the very notion
of qualities such as simplicity and good
structure can only be understood in terms
of the theory of the program, since they
characterize the actual program text in
relation to such program texts that might
have been wriiten to achieve the same
execution behaviour, but which exist only
as possibilities in the programmer’s
understanding.

Program Life, Death, and Revival

A main claim of the Theory Building
View of programming is that an essential
part of any program, the theory of it, is
something that could not conceivably be
expressed, but is inextricably bound to
human beings. It follows that in. describ-
ing the state of the program it is impor-
tant to indicate the extent. to which
programmers having its theory remain in
charge of it. As a way in which to empha-
size this circumstance one might extend
the notion of program building by notions
of program life, death, and revival. The
building of the program is the same as the
building of the theory of it by and in the
team of programmers. During the pro-
gram life a programmer team possessing

its theory remains in active control of the
program, and in particular retains control
over all modifications. The death of a pro-
gram happens when the programmer
team possessing its theory is dissolved. A
dead program may continue to be used
for execution in a computer and to pro-
duce useful results. The actual state of
death becomes visible when demands for
modifications of the program cannot be
intelligently answered. Revival of a pro-
gram is the rebuilding of its theory by a
new programmer team.

The extended life of a program accord-
ing to these notions depends on the taking
over by new generations of programmers
of the theory of the program. For a new
programmer to come to possess an existing
theory of a program it is insufficient that he
or she has the opportunity to become
familiar with the program text and other
documentation. What is required is that
the new programmer has the opportunity
to work in close contact with the pro-
grammers who already possess the the-
ory, so as to be able to become familiar
with the place of the program in the wider
context of the relevant real world situa-
tions and so as to acquire the knowledge
of how the program,..works and how
unusual program reactions and program
modifications are handled within the pro-
gram theory. This problem of education of
new programmers in an existing theory of
a program is quite similar to that of the
educational problem of other activities
where the knowledge of how to do certain
things dominates over the knowledge that
certain things are the case, such as writing
and playing a music instrument. The most
important educational activity is the

---
Page 009
---
Peter Naur, Programming as Theory Building + 235

student’s doing the relevant things under
suitable supervision and guidance. In the
case of programming the activity should
include discussions of the relation
between the program and the relevant
aspects and activities of the real world,
and of the limits set on the real world
matters dealt with by the program.

A very important consequence of the
Theory Building View is that program
revival, that is reestablishing the theory of
a program merely from the documenta-
tion, is strictly impossible. Lest this conse-
quence may seem unreasonable it may be
noted that the need for revival of an
entirely dead program probably will
rarely arise, since it is hardly conceivable
that the revival would be assigned to new
programmers without at least some
knowledge of the theory had by the origi-
nal team. Even so the Theory Building
View suggests strongly that program
revival should only be attempted in
exceptional situations and with full
awareness that it is at best costly, and may
lead to a revived theory that differs from
the one originally had by the program
authors and so may contain discrepancies
with the program text.

In preference to program revival, the
Theory Building View suggests, the exist-
ing program text should be discarded and
the new-formed programmer team
should be given the opportunity to solve
the given problem afresh. Such a
procedure is more likely to produce a
viable program than program revival, and
at no higher, and possibly lower, cost. The
point is that building a theory to fit and
support an-existing program text is a diffi-
cult, frustrating, and time consuming

activity. The new programmer is likely to
feel torn between loyalty to the existing
program text, with whatever obscurities
and weaknesses it may contain, and the
new theory that he or she has to build up,
and which, for better or worse, most
likely will differ from the original theory
behind the program text.

Similar problems are likely to arise
even when a program is kept continu-
ously alive by an evolving team of pro-
grammers, as a result of the differences of
competence and background experience
of the individual programmers, particu-
larly as the team is being kept operational
by inevitable replacements of the individ-
ual members.

Method and Theory Building

Recent years [have] seen much interest
in programming methods. In the present
section some comments will be made on
the relation between the Theory Building
View and the notions behind program-
ming methods.

To begin with, what is a programming
method? This is not always made clear,
even by authors who recommend a par-
ficular method. Here a programming
method will be taken to be a set of work
tules for programmers, telling what kind
of things the programmers should do, in
what order, which notations or languages
to use, and what kinds of documents to
produce at various stages.

In comparing. this notion of method
with the Theory Building View of pro-
gramming, the most important issue is
that of actions or operations and their
ordering. A method implies a claim that
program development can and should

---
Page 010
---
236 =» NAUR, ENN, MUSASHI

proceed as a sequence of actions of certain
kinds, each action leading to a particular
kind of documented result. In building
the theory there can be no particular
sequence of actions, for the reason that a
theory held by a person has no inherent
division into parts and no inherent order-
ing. Rather, the person possessing a the-
ory will be able to produce presentations
of various sorts on the basis of it, in
response to questions or demands.

As to the use of particular kinds of
notation or formalization, again this can
only be a secondary issue since the pri-
mary item, the theory, is not, and cannot
be, expressed, and so no question of the
form of its expression arises.

It follows that on the Theory Building
View, for the primary activity of the pro-
gramming there can be no right method.

This conclusion may seem to conflict
with established opinion, in several ways,
and might thus be taken to be an argu-
ment against the Theory Building View.
Two such apparent contradictions shall be
taken up here, the first relating to the
importance of method in the pursuit of
science, the second concerning the success
of methods as actually used in software
development.

The first argument is that software
development should be based on scien-
tific manners, and so should employ pro-
cedures similar to scientific methods. The
flaw of this argument is the assumption
that there is such a thing as scientific
method and that it is helpful to scientists.
This question has been the subject of
much debate in recent years, and the con-
clusion of such authors as Feyerabend
[1978], taking his illustrations from the

history of physics, and Medawar [1982],
arguing as a biologist, is that the notion of
scientific method as a set of guidelines for
the practising scientist is mistaken.

This conclusion is not contradicted by
such work as that of Polya [1954, 1957] on
problem solving. This work takes its illus-
trations from the field of mathematics and
leads to insight which is also highly rele-
vant to programming. However, it cannot
be claimed to present a method on which
to proceed. Rather, it is a collection of sug-
gestions aiming at stimulating the mental
activity of the problem solver, by pointing
out different modes of work that may be
applied in any sequence.

The second argument that may seem to
contradict the dismissal of method of the
Theory Building View is that the use of
particular methods has been successful,
according to published reports. To this
argument it may be answered that a
methodically satisfactory study of the effi-
cacy of programming methods so far
never seems to have been made. Such a
study would have to employ the well
established technique of controlled experi-
ments (cf. (Brooks, 1980] or [Moher and
Schneider, 1982]). The lack of such studies
is explainable partly by the high cost that
would undoubtedly be incurred in such
investigations if the results were to be sig-
nificant, partly by the problems of estab-
lishing in an operational fashion the
concepts underlying what is called
methods in the field of program develop-
ment. Most published reports on such
methods merely describe and recommend
certain techniques and procedures, with-
out establishing their usefulness or effi-
cacy in any systematic way. An elaborate

dd OO MHD

czyOrFOnM a

ap

BAP SoH a

pods

a9

---
Page 011
---
Peter Naur, Programming as Theory Building

study of five different methods by C.
Floyd and several co-workers [Floyd,
1984] concludes that the notion of meth-
ods as systems of rules that in an arbitrary
context and mechanically will lead to
good solutions is an illusion. What
remains is the effect of methods in the
education of programmers. This conclu-
sion is entirely compatible with the The-
ory Building View of programming.
Indeed, on this view the quality of the the-
ory built by the programmer will depend
to a large extent on the programmer's
familiarity with model solutions of typical
problems, with techniques of description
and verification, and with principles of
structuring systems consisting of many
parts in complicated interactions. Thus
many of the items of concern of methods
are relevant to theory building. Where the
Theory Building View departs from that of
the methodologists is on the question of
which techniques to use and in what
order. On the Theory Building View this
must remain entirely a matter for the pro-
grammer to decide, taking into account
the actual problem to be solved.

Programmers’ Status and the Theory

Building View

The areas where the consequences of the
Theory Building View contrast most strik-
ingly with those of the more prevalent cur-
rent views are those of the programmers’
personal contribution to the activity and of
the programmers’ proper status.

The contrast between the Theory Build-
ing View and the more prevalent view of
the programmers’ personal. contribution
is apparent in much of the common dis-
cussion of programming. As just one

* 237

example, consider the study of modifi-
ability of large software systems by Osk-
arsson [1982]. This study gives extensive
information on a considerable number of
modifications in one release of a large
commercial system. The description cov-
ers the background, substance, and imple-
mentation, of each modification, with
particular attention to the. manner in
which the program changes are confined
to particular program modules. However,
there is no suggestion whatsoever that the
implementation of the modifications
might depend on the background of the
500 programmers employed on the
project, such as the length of time they
have been working on it, and there is no
indication of the manner in which the
design decisions are distributed among
the 500 programmers. Even so the signifi-
cance of an underlying theory is admitted
indirectly in statements such:as that ‘deci-
sions were implemented. in the wrong
block’ and in.a reference to ‘a philosophy
of AXE’. However, by the manner in which
the; study is conducted these admissions
can only remain isolated indications.

More generally, much current discus-
sion of programming seems to assume that
programming is similar to industrial pro-
duction, the programmer being regarded
as a component of that production, a com-
ponent that has to be controlled by rules of
procedure and which can be replaced eas-
ily. Another related view is that human
beings perform. best if they act like
machines, by following rules, with a conse-
quent stress on formal modes of expres-
sion, which make it possible to formulate
certain arguments in terms of rules of for-
mal manipulation. Such views agree well

---
Page 012
---
238 * NAUR, EHN, MUSASHI

with the notion, seemingly common
among persons working with computers,
that the human mind works like a com-
puter. At the level of industrial manage-
ment these views support treating
programmers as workers of fairly low
responsibility, and only brief education.
On the Theory Building View the pri-
mary result of the programming activity is
the theory held by the programmers. Since
this theory by its very nature is part of the
mental possession of each programmer, it
follows that the notion of the programmer
as an easily replaceable component in the
program production activity has to be
abandoned. Instead the programmer must
be regarded as a responsible developer
and manager of the activity in which the
computer. is a part. In order to fill this
position he or she must be given a perma-
nent position, of a status similar to that of
other professionals, such as engineers and
lawyers, whose active contributions as
employers of enterprises rest on their
intellectual proficiency.
, The raising of the status of program-
mers suggested by the Theory Building
View will have to be supported by a cor-
responding reorientation of the program-
mer education. While skills such as the
mastery of notations, data representa-
tions, and data processes, remain
important, the primary emphasis would
have to turn in the direction of furthering
the understanding and talent for theory
formation. To what extent this can be
taught at all must remain an open ques-
tion. The most hopeful approach would
be to have the student work on concrete
problems under guidance, in an active
and constructive environment.

Conclusions

Accepting . program modifications
demanded by changing external circum-
stances to be an essential part of program-
ming, it is argued that the primary aim of
programming is to have the programmers
build a theory of the way the matters at
hand may be supported by the execution
of a program. Such a view leads to a
notion of program life that depends on
the continued support of the program by
programmers having its theory. Further,
on this view the notion of a programming
method, understood as a set of rules of
procedure to be followed by the program-
mer, is based on invalid assumptions and
so has to be rejected. As further. conse-
quences of the view, programmers have to
be accorded the status of responsible, per-
manent developers and managers of the
activity of which the computer is a part,
and their education has to emphasize the
exercise of theory building, side by side
with the acquisition of knowledge of data
processing and notations.

References

Brooks, R. E. Studying programmer
behaviour experimentally. Comm. ACM
23(4): 207-213, 1980.

Feyerabend, P. Against Method. London,
Verso Editions, 1978; ISBN: 86091-700-2.

Floyd, C. Eine Untersuchung von Soft-
ware-Entwicklungs-Methoden. Pp.
248-274 in Programmierumgebungen und
Compiler, ed H. Morgenbrod and W.
Sammer, Tagung 1/1984 des German
Chapter of the ACM, Stuttgart, Teubner
Verlag, 1984; ISBN: 3-519-02437-3.

Kuhn, T. S. The Structure of Scientific Revo-
lutions, Second Edition. Chicago,

Unive
ISBN: |
Medaw: |
Unive
ISBN: |
Moher, ©
ology —
softw, |
Stud. °
Oskarss
ity in
Studie —
tations
91-73;
Polya, G
bleda:
Polya, G
ing. N
Press,
Popper, :
Its Bra
Kegar
Ryle, G.'
swortl
publis

APPLYID
Viewing
ing helps
ing” act
(XP), an
knowled
along de:

The M
Kent E
a design
design o
metapho
program

---
Page 013
---
Peter Naur, Programming as Theory Building. * 239

University of Chicago Press, 1970;
ISBN: 0-226-45803-2.

Medawear, P. Pluto’s Republic. Oxford,
University Press, 1982:

ISBN: 0-19-217726-5.

Moher, T., and Schneider, G. M. Method-
ology and experimental research in
software engineering, Int. J. Man-Mach.
Stud. 16: 65-87, 1. Jan. 1982.

Oskarsson, O Mechanisms of modifiabil-
ity in large software systems Linképing
Studies in Science and Technology, Disser-
tations, no. 77, Linképing, 1982; ISBN:
91-7372-527-7.

Polya, G. How To Solve It . New York, Dou-
bleday Anchor Book, 1957.

Polya, G. Mathematics and Plausible Reason-
ing. New Jersey, Princeton University
Press, 1954. :

Popper, K. R., and Eccles, J. C. The Self and
Its Brain. London, Routledge and
Kegan Paul, 1977.

Ryle, G. The Concept of Mind. Harmond-
sworth, England, Penguin, 1963, first
published 1949. .

APPLYING “THEORY BUILDING”

Viewing programming as theory build-
ing helps us understand “metaphor build-
ing” activity in Extreme Programming
(XP), and the respective roles of tacit
knowledge and documentation in passing
along design knowledge.

The Metaphor as a Theory

Kent Beck suggested that it is useful to
a design team to simplify the general
design of a program to match a single
metaphor. Examples might be, “This
program really looks like an assembly

line, with things getting added to a chas-
sis along the-line,” or “This program
really looks like a restaurant, with waiters
and menus, cooks and cashiers.”

If the metaphor is good, the many asso-
ciations the designers create around the
metaphor turn out to be appropriate to
their programming situation.

That is exactly Naur’s idea of passing
along a theory of the design:

If “assembly line” is an appropriate
metaphor, then later programmers, con-
sidering what they know about assembly
lines, will make guesses about the struc-
ture of the software at hand and find that
their guesses are “close.” That is an
extraordinary power for just the two
words, “assembly line.”

The value of a good metaphor increases
with the number of designers. The closer
each person’s guess is “close” to the other
people’s guesses, the greater the resulting
consistency in the final system design.

Imagine 10 programmers working as
fast.as they can, in parallel, each. making
design decisions and adding classes as
she goes. Each will necessarily develop
her own theory as she goes. As each adds
code, the theory that binds their work
becomes less and less coherent, more and
more complicated. Not only maintenance
gets harder, but their own work gets
harder. The design easily becomes a
“kludge.” If they have a common theory,
on the other hand, they add code in ways
that fit together.

An appropriate, shared metaphor lets a
person guess accurately where someone
else on the team just added code, and how
to fit her new piece in with it.

---
Page 014
---
240 + NAUR, EHN, MUSASHI

Tacit Knowledge and Documentation

The documentation is almost certainly
behind the current state of the program,
but people are good at looking around.
What should you put into the documenta-
tion?

That which helps the next programmer
build an adequate theory of the program.

This is enormously important. The pur-
pose of the documentation is to jog mem-
ories in the reader, set up relevant
pathways of thought about experiences
and metaphors.

This sort of documentation is more sta-
ble over the life of the program than just
naming the pieces of the system currently
in place.

The designers are allowed to use what-
ever forms of expression are necessary to
set up those relevant pathways. They can
even use multiple metaphors, if they
don’t find one that is adequate for the
entire program. They might say that one
section implements a fractal compression
algorithm, a second is like an accounting

ledger, the user interface follows the
model-observer design pattern, and so on.

Experienced designers often start their
documentation with just

+ The metaphors

* Text describing the purpose of each
major component

* Drawings of the major interactions
between the major components

These three items alone take the next team
a long way to constructing a useful theory
of the design.

The source code itself serves to commu-
nicate a theory to the next programmer.
Simple, consistent naming conventions
help the next person build a coherent the-
ory. When people talk about “clean code,”
a large part of what they are referring to is
how easily the reader can build a coherent
theory of the system.

Documentation cannot—and so need
not—say everything. Its purpose is to
help the next programmer build an accu-
rate theory about the system.

oh bet Ret et eNO

BO TH He Om

